Exploring an Ethereum Hooks NPM Package Abdullah Muhammad 5 min read · Oct 5, 2025 -- Basic understanding of TypeScript, React.
js, and how NPM packages work will be sufficient for working through the contents of this article.
 Fond of cryptocurrency?
 Explore everything related to the Ethereum blockchain with this free, comprehensive dashboard built using Next.
js.
 Get your article audibles here!
 I made this tool which makes audio files accessible for any non-paywall Medium articles!
 Implementation can be found here.
 Introduction The JavaScript ecosystem is an ever-growing ecosystem of third-party NPM packages.
 Developers can utilize any of these packages or publish their own for the community.
 I set out to create a nice utility NPM package that allows users and developers alike to readily access on-chain data related to Ethereum using API endpoints.
 These API endpoints run authenticated API calls and work with different API providers for accessing the relevant on-chain data.
 If you know how React hooks work (as explored in this article), understanding the structure of this custom NPM package will be very easy.
 The package covers various aspects of the Ethereum ecosystem such as ENS, ERC20/721 tokens, gas, and pricing.
 It contains 30 custom React hooks that access pro-tier API endpoints.
 Each hook accesses these endpoints through an AWS Lambda function which is used to run authenticated API requests and each endpoint comes with its own usage limits.
 The package aims to simplify front-end development because you no longer have to set up your own back-end endpoints for running authenticated API calls.
 No need for excess boilerplate code for your back-end.
 You can readily access on-chain Ethereum data by utilizing any of the 30 custom hooks.
 Key Features and API Providers ethereum-hooks NPM package consists of five sections and it utilizes a select group of API providers which I will briefly highlight in this section.
 The five sections are listed below with a brief description of each: ENS — Access relevant data related to ENS domains and conversions ERC20 — Access data for ERC20 tokens by providing a contract address ERC721 — Access data for ERC721 tokens by providing a contract address Prices — Access pricing for Ethereum and other ERC20 tokens Gas — Access data related to gas on the Ethereum network Of the 30 custom hooks, here is the breakdown of quantity per each section: ENS (4), ERC20 (5), ERC721 (16), Prices (1), Gas (4).
 There are several API providers used for allowing users to access this data.
 Keep in mind, each of these endpoints utilizes an API key to run the authenticated API call.
 The actual API call takes place inside an AWS Lambda function.
 These hooks point to the AWS Lambda function for retrieving the relevant data.
 The subsequent sections cover request flow and the API keys utilized.
 The following is a list of the different API providers used in this NPM package: Alchemy Blocknative CoinGecko Moralis Opensea Transpose Feel free to read more about each of these providers by reading up their official docs.
 Crypto Hook Request Flow The package uses AWS Lambda functions to construct authenticated API calls.
 The architecture follows a simple flow: Client Hook → useFetch → AWS Lambda → Response.
 The AWS Lambda functions handle authentication automatically using pre-configured API keys for various blockchain services: OPENSEA_API_KEY — For NFT marketplace data MORALIS_API_KEY — For Web3 data aggregation BLK_API_KEY — For Block native gas and mempool data TRANSPOSE_API_KEY — For indexed blockchain data ALCHEMY_API_KEY — For Ethereum node access and enhanced APIs No back-end setup is required for use.
 You install the package and use the hooks according to the documentation provided.
 Custom Types and Efficient Error Handling Each custom hook consists of efficient error handling and type safety ensuring you provide the required fields for running each API request correctly.
 Each hook utilizes the useFetch custom hook for efficient data fetching.
 There are two custom types associated with this project: FetchStateType — Consists of an object with three attributes: data, loading, and error to ensure smooth request processing and error handling.
 LayerTwoType — Access Layer Two data by providing a value of a supported layer two using this custom data type.
 Each endpoint follows a similar design pattern to ensure you are familiar with how to use each of them.
 They are modular as each endpoint is located in its own sub-directory (ENS, ERC20/721, pricing, gas).
 Example Usage In this section, I will outline how you can incorporate one of these hooks in a custom React component.
 The README.
md file outlines a simple example which I will dive deeper into here: As you can see, this custom React component accesses the relevant sub-directory for ENS hooks and utilizes the ENSToAddress custom hook for converting a given ENS name to its appropriate wallet address.
 We provide the relevant data for the custom hook as per documentation to ensure the request processes correctly.
 Behind the scenes, as we covered earlier, each endpoint uses the FetchStateType for request processing so we conditionally render the custom component based on the three different states.
 That is all there is to it.
 Audit Note that this NPM package DOES NOT access or need access to an Ethereum wallet.
 It only accesses on-chain data related to the Ethereum network via API endpoints.
 If you are concerned about safety, you can audit the package yourself using socket.
dev.
 The package is lean and efficient.
 It is not bloated with files and it does not consist of any dependencies.
 At the time of this writing, the latest package version is 2.
0.
2.
 Conclusion We explored the ethereum-hooks NPM package in great detail and saw how it can expediate front-end development.
 With 30 custom hooks, users and developers alike gain access to on-chain Ethereum information such as ENS domains, ERC20/721 tokens, gas prices, and pricing in general.
 No boilerplate code is required.
 All the functionality is handled for you out-of-the-box including the setup of AWS Lambda and running authenticated API calls.
 Feel free to explore this NPM package on your own in your projects.
 Keep in mind, there are usage limits associated with these endpoints.
 You can read more about the package here.
 Thank you!
 A message from our Founder Hey, Sunil here.
 I wanted to take a moment to thank you for reading until the end and for being a part of this community.
 Did you know that our team run these publications as a volunteer effort to over 3.
5m monthly readers?
 We don’t receive any funding, we do this to support the community.
 ❤️ If you want to show some love, please take a moment to follow me on LinkedIn, TikTok, Instagram.
 You can also subscribe to our weekly newsletter.
 And before you go, don’t forget to clap and follow the writer️!

