The AWS EC2 Single-Tier Architecture Pattern Abdullah Muhammad · Follow Published in Stackademic · 7 min read · Sep 20, 2024 -- Exploring the use of a single EC2 instance to power all your front-end, back-end and database requirements.
 Get your article audibles here!
 I made this tool which makes audio files accessible for any non-paywall Medium articles!
 Implementation can be found here.
 Introduction We covered AWS EC2 in great detail and looked at using an EC2 instance for setting up a web application.
 We will now focus on implementing design patterns using EC2 instances.
 In this tutorial, we will dive deep into the Single-Tier architecture pattern.
 In this design pattern, we use a single EC2 instance to setup and manage application requirements.
 Whether you are running a front-end application, full-stack application or incorporating a database, a single EC2 instance might be sufficient enough to handle this workload.
 I say might because there are limitations to this model as it relates to availability and reliability.
 Running your entire workload on a single EC2 instance is risky because it becomes a single point of failure that can bring down the entire system.
 If there was, say, another EC2 instance or a cluster of instances which enhanced performance (enabled scaling), this would ensure maximal uptime, reliability, scalability, and performance.
 These are benefits you might be familiar with if you read my article discussing the fundamental concepts of cloud computing.
 Luckily, these benefits are attainable in higher-tier architecture patterns which we will discuss in future tutorials.
 The Single-Tier Model The Single-Tier model has its advantages when working with applications.
 If you are running a small workload, it makes sense to work with a single server.
 If you are working on a budget or have an application that does not incur high user traffic, implementing the single-tier model might be ideal for you.
 The model can be best described with the following illustration: We make use of AWS VPC as well as a public subnet to enable inbound internet traffic to the server.
 Within the server, we configure the front-end, back-end, and the database.
 That is all there is to working with the single-tier model.
 We previously worked with a single EC2 instance when we covered AWS DocumentDB.
 However, the database was isolated from the EC2 instance and was residing in a private subnet of its own.
 The following illustration explains what we worked on in that AWS DocumentDB tutorial: In the single-tier model, we incorporate the database within the EC2 instance and setup configurations for the front-end and back-end servers.
 The database we will use for data persistence will be MongoDB.
 It is simple, effective, and easy to setup and use.
 We will not go into the details of launching and configuring an EC2 instance nor will we dive into setting up the required dependencies to run both the front-end and back-end servers.
 Feel free to refer to the AWS DocumentDB tutorial for further details on these concepts.
 The tutorial is lengthy, but it does a thorough walkthrough of the entire setup process.
 In this tutorial, we will focus on installing, setting up, and utilizing MongoDB inside an EC2 instance.
 Project Configuration Before we proceed, I would like to outline the services you will need to install and configure on your EC2 instance.
 The following list is a summary with a link to each service: Node/NPM Git Nginx PM2 Mongod Each of these aside from Mongod was covered in the AWS DocumentDB tutorial.
 Let us proceed to configuring MongoDB on an EC2 instance.
 Configuring MongoDB The official site of MongoDB contains documentation related to setting up MongoDB on an AWS EC2 instance.
 We are working with the free-tier AMI (AWS Linux 2023) so we will follow steps for setting up MongoDB for that.
 Connect to your EC2 instance and enter the following command to create the desired file: sudo touch /etc/yum.
repos.
d/mongodb-org-7.
0.
repo Inside this file, enter the following information: [mongodb-org-7.
0] name=MongoDB Repository baseurl=https://repo.
mongodb.
org/yum/amazon/2023/mongodb-org/7.
0/x86_64/ gpgcheck=1 enabled=1 gpgkey=https://pgp.
mongodb.
com/server-7.
0.
asc Now, we install the latest version of MongoDB using the following command: sudo yum install -y mongodb-org We can check to see the version of mongod installed using: mongod --version If MongoDB was installed correctly, you should see something like this: We can start and verify if MongoDB is running by using the following commands: sudo systemctl start mongod sudo systemctl status mongod By default, MongoDB runs on port 27017 so ensure inbound/outbound traffic is enabled on that port in your EC2 instance.
 Optionally, we can start to work with MongoDB by running a shell session using: mongosh And that is all there is to it!
 Code Overview You can follow along by cloning the following repository.
 The directory of concern is demos/Demo49_AWS_EC2_Single_Tier_Architecture.
 The codebase closely resembles what we covered in the AWS DocumentDB tutorial.
 The main difference is the way we connect the database to the back-end node server.
 The back-end/server.
js file details how we do this: In this case, we utilize the mongoose library as before, but include four additional properties in the database connection string: AWS_EC2_USERNAME AWS_EC2_PASSWORD AWS_INSTANCE_PUBLIC_IP DATABASE_NAME All of these can be set as environment variables stored locally inside a .
env file.
 That is about it.
 In the front-end server, the codebase uses http://localhost:5000 to send requests to the back-end server.
 Here, you will need to modify this string to the following format: http://<public_ip_address>:<port_number> This will need to be done in each of the following four files: DeleteUserPage.
jsx InsertUserPage.
jsx UpdateUserPage.
jsx userData.
js (located in utilFunctions directory) Feel free to revisit the AWS DocumentDB tutorial for a more detailed explanation on the front-end and back-end codebases.
 Since it is practically the same, we will not cover them in detail in this tutorial.
 Demo Time!
 Assuming you have configured and launched the front-end, back-end, and MongoDB database, we can proceed (refer to the AWS DocumentDB demo section for assistance).
 The demo involves performing the basic CRUD operations against your database.
 Since the front-end UI closely resembles that of the front-end in the AWS DocumentDB demo, the following screens roughly illustrate what the UI should look like after each successful operation.
 The Nginx web server should direct to the home page and it should look something like this: *NOTE THE FOLLOWING SCREENS ARE FROM THE AWS DOCUMENTDB TUTORIAL, BUT YOUR UI SHOULD LOOK EXACTLY THE SAME AFTER EACH SUCCESSFUL OPERATION* Proceed to the Insert User section and fill out the details accordingly: Heading over to the Read User section in the web application, we should see the following: Now, let us try to update this user.
 Head over to the Update User section and fill out any fields you would like to update.
 Remember, email addresses cannot be changed and they must be used to figure out which user attributes need to be updated: In this case, we update the last name and password of the requested user.
 The application knows which user to update by using the email address provided.
 If we head over to the Read User section, we should see the updated attributes along with the new date modified timestamp: We can proceed to delete this user in the Delete User section.
 You must provide the correct email address of the user you want to delete: Navigating to the Read User section, we should find that no records exist: So just like before, your results should match screens posted above.
 Feel free to refer to the AWS DocumentDB tutorial if you have any difficulty.
 That is all!
 Conclusion We covered quite a bit as it relates to implementing the single-tier architecture pattern using AWS EC2.
 We were able to create a front-end server, back-end server, and configure a MongoDB database all within a single server.
 We touched on the pros and cons of working with this design pattern and did a walkthrough of setting up MongoDB inside an AWS EC2 instance.
 Linked below are the GitHub repository used for this tutorial and the official guide to installing MongoDB on an AWS EC2 instance: GitHub Repository AWS EC2 MongoDB Installation Guide I hope you enjoyed this tutorial and look forward to more in the future.
 Thank you!
 Stackademic 🎓 Thank you for reading until the end.
 Before you go: Please consider clapping and following the writer!
 👏 Follow us X | LinkedIn | YouTube | Discord Visit our other platforms: In Plain English | CoFeed | Differ More content at Stackademic.
com
