Quick Look at Publishing Packages to the NPM Registry Abdullah Muhammad 6 min read · 5 days ago -- Basic understanding of JavaScript, NPM, and web development will be sufficient for working through the contents of this article.
 Fond of cryptocurrency?
 Explore everything related to the Ethereum blockchain with this free, comprehensive dashboard built using Next.
js.
 Get your article audibles here!
 I made this tool which makes audio files accessible for any non-paywall Medium articles!
 Implementation can be found here.
 Introduction In this short article, we will explore publishing your own NPM packages.
 We have looked at NPM in the past and its rich JavaScript ecosystem, but we did not touch on package publishing.
 Publishing requires you to have an account with NPM.
 This allows you to authenticate yourself and publish a package of your own.
 In this article, we will explore two packages that I have published myself to the NPM ecosystem.
 We will touch on publishing a dummy package to NPM and learn how the publication process works.
 The key component to all this is the package.
json file.
 Not only is it vital for developing modern JavaScript applications, it serves as a blueprint which NPM uses to document the key features of your JavaScript application.
 This includes everything from title, versioning, licensing, installation, documentation, dependencies, and so much more.
 It is important to ensure all the key features (including the optional ones), are filled out in order to publish a package that developers can read through and understand how to use.
 There is no point in publishing a package that nobody knows how to use.
 Documentation is key.
 Key Features of the package.
json File Let us now look at the key features of the package.
json file.
 This will help you get familiarized with the most vital things you need to include for NPM publishing.
 Aside from including a detailed README.
md file (which NPM uses for publishing package documentation), the following features are noteworthy to include for a successful publish: name — Name of the package you would like to publish version — Version number of the package to be published main — The entry point for your JavaScript application when accessing this package license — Copyright and usage rules are outlined with a license name The following list details optional fields you can include as well: description — What the package entails, what it allows developers to do keywords — Fields the package is related to (frameworks, languages, etc.
) author — Whose name the package is being published under repository — Link to the version control repository responsible for maintaining the package homepage — Website link that is dedicated to detailing information about the package scripts —Highlight commands that can be used in development dependencies (mandatory if project uses any) — Any third-party packages the package itself depends on for development public/private publishing — Boolean field that indicates whether to publish a package privately or public for everyone to access The gist below highlights what a minimal package.
json file looks like for a successful NPM publish: Of course, adding more details to the file would make for a better publish, but the minimum required fields are all complete.
 Publishing a Dummy Package You can follow along by cloning this repository.
 The demo directory we will be focusing on is /demos/Demo64_Publish_NPM_Packages/next_app.
 The application is a simple Hello World website that uses the Next.
js App Router.
 We will publish this dummy web application to NPM.
 Most NPM packages serve as solutions for developers to integrate into their own projects.
 Packages are basically third-party problem solvers which developers can readily use without having to code out their own custom solutions.
 To get started, you need to ensure dependencies are installed by running npm install.
 Once that is complete, we look at the package.
json file and look at the key features we discussed earlier: As you can see, the package.
json file encompasses fields we discussed earlier.
 Optional fields are also added to enhance developer experience.
 A basic README.
md file is also provided that covers documentation for the package: A basic file for a basic web application which succinctly details how to use this package.
 Publishing to the NPM Registry To start the publication process, you need to authenticate yourself.
 You do this by running npm login from the development console (inside this repo).
 You need to enter in your NPM account credentials in the prompt window.
 Once that is complete, NPM will know the destination of the published packages.
 After that, you simply run npm publish to build and upload your newly created package to the NPM registry.
 The console will notify you if there are any errors during the publishing process.
 You can see the published package by searching for Packages under your account on the NPM website.
 The following image details what you should see upon a successful publication: You can see the NPM package page containing all the relevant information from your package.
json file.
 This includes the title, description, versioning, dependencies, keywords, licensing, and the README.
md file which serves the main documentation for the package.
 If we want to re-publish this package, we can do so by adjusting the version number in the package.
json file.
 You cannot re-publish under the same version number.
 My Own Published Packages Recently, I have published two packages to NPM which I believe are great tools for developers in the web3 and blogging space.
 They are listed below: Ethereum Hooks Next MDX Blog Starter Kit Ethereum Hooks The Ethereum hooks package is dedicated to providing developers easy access to free crypto API endpoints by invoking from a set of custom hooks.
 The package itself uses a custom hook for optimizing the data fetching process.
 With the help of these custom hooks, developers can readily access data related to the Ethereum ecosystem such as ENS, ERC20/721 tokens, wallet activity, and so on.
 No need to write excessive boilerplate code for fetching data on the Ethereum blockchain.
 Simply pass in values as parameters to any of these custom hooks and you get access to everything.
 Common API libraries supported: Alchemy, CoinGecko, etc.
 Feel free to explore and learn more about this package here.
 Next MDX Blog Starter Kit Jumpstart blog development with the help of Next.
js, MDX, AWS S3, and Supabase.
 The web application utilizes the App Router for development and allows users to serve static and dynamic content using Supabase.
 Packages related to MDX (Markdown + JSX) are used such as MDXRemote for fetching content from Supabase.
 A custom mdx-components.
tsx file is also provided which details custom MDX components and styling for built-in elements used in MDX files.
 AWS S3 is used for storing files and images that belong to published blog posts inside a S3 bucket.
 The layout design is inspired by the Lovable development agent.
 The package contains scripts for running CRUD operations on articles, SQL scripts for setting up the Supabase database, Powershell/Shell scripts for quick project setup, and a Dockerfile for running a containerized version of the web application.
 Feel free to explore and learn more about this package here.
 Conclusion To conclude, we looked at publishing packages to the NPM registry.
 We touched on the key features of a package.
json file and what is required for publishing.
 We did a demo of the publication process using a dummy web application and looked at two commands that help with the authentication and publishing process.
 We also explored two packages that I pushed to the NPM registry.
 Below, you will find links to the NPM registry, GitHub repository used in this article, package.
json docs, and links to the two published packages we discussed earlier: GitHub Repository package.
json Docs NPM Registry Docs Ethereum Hooks NPM Package Next MDX Blog Starter NPM Package I hope you found this article helpful and look forward to more in the future.
 Thank you!
 Thank you for being a part of the community Before you go: Be sure to clap and follow the writer ️👏️️ Follow us: X | LinkedIn | YouTube | Newsletter | Podcast | Twitch Start your own free AI-powered blog on Differ 🚀 Join our content creators community on Discord 🧑🏻‍💻 For more content, visit plainenglish.
io + stackademic.
com
