Exploring Vercel Edge Functions, Middleware and CRON Jobs Abdullah Muhammad 6 min read · 5 days ago Basic understanding of web development will be sufficient for working through the contents of this article.
 Fond of cryptocurrency?
 Explore everything related to the Ethereum blockchain with this free, comprehensive dashboard built using Next.
js.
 Get your article audibles here!
 I made this tool which makes audio files accessible for any non-paywall Medium articles!
 Implementation can be found here.
 Introduction We have looked at many aspects of Next.
js and Vercel in past tutorials (analytics, CLI, developer console, and so on), but today, we will focus on three key features we have not covered so far: Edge Functions Middleware CRON jobs The article will be short and sweet.
 We will cover each of these concepts in greater detail and why you should use them in development.
 When we covered data caching using Next.
js, we looked at designating different options through the use of keywords (force-static, force-dynamic, etc.
).
 Next.
js flexibility in terms of caching allows developers to enforce different types of page rendering such as SSG, SSR, and ISR.
 We studied each of these closely in the Next.
js caching tutorial.
 When we cover Edge functions, we will cover what they are and how easily we can integrate them into the applications we are building.
 You can follow along by cloning this GitHub repository.
 The directory of concern is /demos/Demo61_Vercel_Edge_Functions/next-app.
 Let us dive right in!
 Vercel Edge Functions Edge functions allow one to define functions that are easily accessible and performant with low latency.
 They are nothing more than the API routes we explored with Next.
js except that they are designated in a unique way that, when deployed to Vercel, instructs to deploy the API route in a unique way.
 You should know that Vercel itself is a cloud platform which utilizes its own global infrastructure to deploy server-less functions.
 This has added benefits such as low latency as we discussed earlier, but also availability as it does not rely on a single server.
 With its integrated CDN, you have the option of data caching as well as geo-location, logging, and analytics to track and check function performance.
 You can think of Vercel Edge Functions a lot like AWS Lambda (an AWS service we will explore in a future tutorial).
 But the benefits you get with edge functions allows you to do a lot more because the functions themselves utilize Vercel’s web APIs and deployments are optimized to handle edge functions.
 Such may not be the case if you rely on AWS Lambda as that service is a more general use, server-less service.
 Like AWS Lambda, there some subtle disadvantages to consider.
 For instance, cold starts.
 Utilizing edge functions works best for workloads that are small or spontaneous in nature.
 For compute-heavy or workload-intense activity, you are better off utilizing the built-in API route functionality.
 The following codebase illustrates how to create a Vercel Edge Function src/app/api/edge/route.
ts: We simply create an API route in the back-end (like we have seen before) and designate it as an edge function using a variable named runtime with a string value of edge.
 Vercel has these little shortcuts about them that really enhance developer experience.
 Of course, behind the scenes, a lot more work is done to ensure what we want takes place.
 Feel free to utilize these wherever you see fit.
 In the end, edge functions have their place in Next.
js development and it is up to you to decide when is the best time to use them.
 This is just another optimization method for you to consider when looking to improve the performance of your Next.
js applications.
 Middleware We discussed JWTs and how to use them when creating protected back-end routes using Express.
js.
 Feel free to read a refresher on JWT authentication and middleware in this article.
 The concepts are largely the same in the context of Next.
js, but the implementation is slightly different.
 Next.
js App Router Approach When working with back-end routes with Express, we would define an intermediate function that would perform certain checks before passing control to a final function that would handle the actual request.
 The intermediate function would be invoked if a user tried to access a route that was protected.
 We would ensure the user is authenticated (checking JWT status) before proceeding with the actual request (invoking the next function).
 When defining middleware in a Next.
js application, we simply designate a file named middleware.
ts in the project root directory and hard-code the protected routes where this middleware function would need to be invoked.
 We use a special variable named config and export an object that consists of an array of all path patterns to consider as protected routes.
 The following codebase illustrates how you can utilize a middleware function to handle JWT authentication in Next.
js /src/middleware.
ts: We check to see if a token is valid and if so, we verify its credentials.
 If successful, we pass control to the request handler function.
 In every other case, we send back an error and request to redirect the user to the login page.
 At the end, we export a variable named config that contains detailed information on the protected routes where this middleware function should be invoked.
 Vercel CRON Jobs Ever thought of a unique way of automating tasks without worrying about running them yourself?
 Well, there is the concept of CRON jobs that allows you to do just that.
 You may or may not be familiar with CRON jobs, but they are schedulers that organize tasks to be run independently at set intervals.
 CRON jobs utilize a simple syntax to designate desired intervals to schedule running jobs.
 We will briefly cover the syntax and how a Next.
js application can utilize a CRON job for development.
 A CRON expression utilizes five spaced characters using asterisks.
 Each asterisk acts as a placeholder for the different types of intervals: * * * * * First denotes intervals in minutes (0–59) Second denotes intervals in hours (0–23) Third denotes intervals in days of a month (1–31) Fourth denotes intervals in months (1–12) Fifth denotes intervals in days of a week (0–6) You can leave some placeholders in place (*) which would act as a wildcard.
 For instance, if you have the following expression: * 5 * * 5 This expression indicates that you would like a job to run every fifth hour and every minute of that hour (5:00–5:59 AM) on every fifth day of the week (Friday) of every month.
 You can make these as simple or complex as you need to suit what you are looking for.
 The official Vercel docs on CRON jobs actually has a CRON expression validator for you to test a custom CRON expression.
 The following example illustrates how one can create a CRON job.
 We first need to define the CRON job expression in a file named cron.
json in the project root directory like this /src/cron.
json: We define an object that contains the CRON expression as well as path(s) to consider.
 The codebase below defines a simple back-end route that will run on the desired interval src/app/cron/route.
ts: The back-end route should output the date and time when the request was invoked.
 You can verify if it works correctly by matching what the CRON schedule is to the date output.
 As you can see, this is very straight forward and easy to setup.
 Conclusion In all, we dove deep into three important concepts as it relates to Next.
js development: Vercel Edge Functions Middleware CRON Jobs Each have their place in development and it is important to at least understand how they work.
 Attached below, you will find links to the GitHub repository used in this tutorial, the official documentation links to Vercel Edge Functions, Middleware, and CRON jobs.
 GitHub Repository Vercel Edge Functions Middleware CRON Jobs I hope you found this article helpful and look forward to more in the future.
 Thank you!
 Thank you for being a part of the community Before you go: Be sure to clap and follow the writer ️👏️️ Follow us: X | LinkedIn | YouTube | Newsletter | Podcast | Differ | Twitch Check out CoFeed, the smart way to stay up-to-date with the latest in tech 🧪 Start your own free AI-powered blog on Differ 🚀 Join our content creators community on Discord 🧑🏻‍💻 For more content, visit plainenglish.
io + stackademic.
com
