Deep Dive into MDX.
js for Documentation and Integration with React Abdullah Muhammad · Subscribe Published in Stackademic · 6 min read · Dec 14, 2024 Basic knowledge of Markdown and React.
js will be helpful for walking through the contents of this article.
 Fond of cryptocurrency?
 Explore everything related to the Ethereum blockchain with this free, comprehensive dashboard built using Next.
js.
 Get your article audibles here!
 I made this tool which makes audio files accessible for any non-paywall Medium articles!
 Implementation can be found here.
 Introduction Today, we will explore working with Markdown and using MDX.
js to incorporate React components (JSX) into Markdown files.
 You may have come across Markdown in the past.
 Those cute looking README.
md files across different GitHub repos detailing documentation and instructions.
 You can think of .
mdx as an extension of .
md in that, you can generate rich-looking documentation using JSX components and publish these pages using any static site based framework such as Next.
js.
 The syntax is straight forward and easy to follow.
 The basic rules of Markdown syntax remain intact.
 The main difference is that you can readily add JSX to your .
mdx file using JSX syntax.
 We will highlight some of the main features of working with MDX and explore a demo where we see MDX in action.
 MDX The link to their official documentation is here.
 We will look at MDX as is and then explore integrations using React and TypeScript.
 MDX provides support for both JavaScript and TypeScript out-of-the-box.
 It is assumed you already know Markdown and how it works so we will dive right in.
 We will not walkthrough the basics as the official docs cover it nicely.
 There is quite a bit of configuration when it comes to working with MDX files, but it is nothing too complicated and we will walkthrough the setup process.
 We will incorporate a famous library known as React-Syntax-Highlighter for effective documentation involving code.
 Feel free to refer to their official docs here.
 MDX NPM Dependencies When working with React, we have the flexibility of working with four different file extensions, .
js, .
jsx, .
ts, and .
tsx.
 Of course, this depends on if you are working with JavaScript or TypeScript.
 When working with MDX, you will need to setup additional configuration.
 The following is a list of NPM dependencies: @mdx-js/loader — Web pack loader for MDX.
js @mdx-js/react — Package that enables development using React.
js @customize-cra — Package for customizing Create-React-App applications @react-app-rewired — Seamlessly setup configuration for your project These four packages will be helpful for setting up and working with MDX.
 Project Setup You can follow along by cloning the following repository.
 The directory of concern is demos/Demo53_MDX.
 In the root location of your project, you will need to set two different files and both are related to MDX configuration.
 /config-overrides.
js: /mdx.
d.
ts: The first file relates to overriding existing configuration and adding a rule for handling MDX files.
 The code is self-explanatory and it incorporates the use of the @mdx-js/loader dependency.
 The second file simply defines a type definition for MDX nothing too complicated here.
 Finally, we have to re-define scripts within the package.
json file incorporating a module we briefed on earlier: For additional documentation related to each of these, feel free to refer to the official NPM docs.
 That is all there is to setting up and working with MDX, it is extensive, but can be simplified to these three steps.
 Code Overview Now we dive into the actual code of the demo project we will be working on.
 It is a simple project that highlights the historical price data of Bitcoin in the past seven days.
 In the src directory, inside the Components folder, you will find the following file BitcoinPriceTable.
tsx: Nothing too fancy here, we make use of the built-in table HTML element and organize data gathered from a custom function that retrieves Bitcoin price data.
 We make use of the @tanstack/react-query library to fetch Bitcoin data and work with the different states of query fetching to conditionally render the table component.
 Speaking of that custom function, it is located here utilFunctions/bitcoinPrice.
ts: Pretty straight forward stuff.
 We make an API call to retrieve historic price data for Bitcoin and modify and return the data using a commonly known date handling library, day.
js.
 If you read through the AG-Grid tutorial, you are already familiar with the day.
js library.
 It provides built-in functions for efficient date handling.
 Finally, we need to wrap this custom BitcoinPriceTable using the MDXProvider for working with React.
 You can find this custom component here /Components/MDXViewer.
ts: Since this is a standalone component and the only one for this project, we can simply add all the necessary providers here.
 This includes the MDXProvider component for working with React that comes with the @mdx-js/react package and the QueryClientProvider for working the @tanstack/react-query package.
 Again, very straight forward and easy to understand.
 BitcoinInformation.
mdx File Now, comes the fun part.
 The MDX file!
 /MDX/BitcoinInformation.
mdx GitHub does not have support for .
mdx file types so I cannot post the Gist here, but you can review the code using the location provided above.
 In that MDX file, we are making use of react-syntax-highlighter.
 It is a famous highlighter package found in blogs, documentation, etc.
 It has custom props and we are making use of the dark style type for highlighting the code snippets within the MDX file.
 You can refer to additional documentation related to the syntax highlighter here.
 You can also see how we seamlessly integrate JSX into the MDX file.
 The custom component, BitcoinPriceTable is imported and used directly inside the MDX file.
 Imports related to the syntax highlighter and custom types mirror exactly how they are done in JavaScript/TypeScript.
 That is all there is to it.
 Effectively, the rest is littered with HTML tags and Markdown syntax.
 Demo Time!
 Assuming you have cloned the repository above, you can follow along.
 Ensure you have the necessary dependencies setup via npm install and have modified the package.
json file, as mentioned earlier.
 Running npm start should yield the following: The MDX file is pretty large so I decided to display it in three different screens.
 This is how you work with and render MDX files using React.
 You can see the scrollable syntax highlighter snippets in action as well as the custom component, BitcoinPriceTable we imported using JSX above.
 Pretty, neat, and clean.
 Pretty straight forward.
 Conclusion We explored MDX extensively in this tutorial.
 We saw how we can incorporate JSX into Markdown files and utilize the MDX files themselves inside of a React project.
 We touched on the differences between Markdown and MDX as well as the different dependencies required for working with MDX.
 We did a thorough walk through of the configuration steps needed for working with MDX (setting up config files, type definition files, modifying scripts, etc).
 As well as a demo where we used libraries such as @tanstack/react-query, day.
js, and react-syntax-highlighter for effective data retrieval related to Bitcoin and its documentation.
 Linked below are resources used in this tutorial as well as the link to the GitHub repository: GitHub Repository mdx.
js TanStack — React Query React Syntax Highlighter day.
js I hope you found this tutorial helpful and look forward to more in the future.
 Thank you!
 Stackademic 🎓 Thank you for reading until the end.
 Before you go: Please consider clapping and following the writer!
 👏 Follow us X | LinkedIn | YouTube | Discord | Newsletter | Podcast Create a free AI-powered blog on Differ.
 More content at Stackademic.
com Have a story to share?
 Join our global community of writers today!

