Detailed Look at SSG, SSR, ISR, and Hydration in Next.
js Abdullah Muhammad · Subscribe Published in Stackademic · 7 min read · Mar 27, 2025 Basic understanding of web development will be sufficient for working through the contents of this article.
 Fond of cryptocurrency?
 Explore everything related to the Ethereum blockchain with this free, comprehensive dashboard built using Next.
js.
 Get your article audibles here!
 I made this tool which makes audio files accessible for any non-paywall Medium articles!
 Implementation can be found here.
 Introduction In this short article, we will explore three different methods for page rendering using Next.
js.
 In the previous tutorial, we explored some helpful React libraries and mentioned that React is a UI library primarily focused on front-end development.
 You can develop SPAs (Single Page Applications) using pure React, which means pages are rendered on the client-side.
 Next.
js, however, is a full-stack framework that uses React as its core for developing full-stack applications.
 As such, Next.
js supports three different page rendering methods, which we will explore in this article.
 We will also highlight libraries and frameworks that support each of these rendering methods.
 The three page rendering methods are as follows: SSG — Static Site Generation SSR — Server-Side Rendering ISR — Incremental Static Regeneration Note that not all web applications require a full-stack framework.
 The method you choose for developing your application truly depends on the project’s needs and scope.
 For a simple, static site that requires no back-end or authentication, SSG (Static Site Generation) is usually the best choice.
 If you are building a full-stack application that involves data that requires frequent updates, SSR (Server-Side Rendering) is the way to go.
 For sites that work with data, but only need occasional updates, ISR (Incremental Static Regeneration) is the ideal solution.
 The best part about working with Next.
js is that you can mix and match these rendering methods for each page to optimize your web app.
 There is no one-size-fits-all approach.
 Pages that do not require frequent updates can be SSG rendered, while others that work with data can be SSR or ISR rendered, and so on.
 In the forthcoming sections, we will explore how to implement each of these rendering methods using Next.
js.
 Understanding Hydration We know that Next.
js relies on file-based routing to render pages.
 By incorporating the built-in Fetch API provided by JavaScript, we can inform Next.
js how to render specific pages.
 With the introduction of React server components, there is an added layer of complexity one should be familiar with and that is the concept of Hydration.
 Hydration is the process where JavaScript features such as event listeners are attached to the pre-rendered HTML sent from the server, making the page interactive.
 React server components require no hydration because there is no JavaScript interactivity in these components.
 We know that we cannot use React hooks, browser APIs, and so on.
 This enhances performance as these components are rendered as is from the server.
 Hydration is associated with client components.
 The server sends the pre-rendered HTML file to the client where all the JavaScript features are loaded in which “hydrates” the page for interactivity.
 This is why it is best practice to work with server components wherever possible in order to minimize the amount of JavaScript sent to the client.
 That is because delays can occur as this process takes place which means the page will not be operable.
 You should also implement granularity in your pages where you separate portions of the page that require client interactivity with those that do not.
 Implementing Different Page Rendering Methods In this section, we will explore how to implement each of the rendering methods we discussed earlier with a brief description and code example.
 SSG — Static Site Generation SSG is a rendering method where static pages are generated at build time and then served as cached content via a CDN.
 This is ideal for content that does not need to be frequently updated or does not need to be updated at all.
 The HTML file is created once during the build process and then served to the user.
 This is ideal for content-heavy sites such as blogs, documentation sites, portfolio sites, and so on because you will not need to update the loaded pages.
 The content on the pages will never change.
 Utilizing SSG results in fast page loads enhancing site performance.
 If you are working with data that does not need to be updated, you can fetch data once and cache it using the Fetch API.
 The API comes with its own data caching options.
 It no longer caches fetched data by default, you have to explicitly opt into it: There are a variety of caching options that come with the Fetch API.
 To implement SSG, we can utilize the built-in force-cache option.
 This tells Next.
js to fetch the data once and store it forever.
 There will be no subsequent API calls made to the same source.
 Alternatively, you have the option to set data caching by exporting a named constant, dynamic (it must be named this way) and setting it to a string value of force-static.
 SSR — Server Side Rendering Server-Side Rendering (SSR) is a rendering method where pages are generated on the server for each request, rather than at build time.
 This ensures that content is always up-to-date utilizing the latest data.
 We know that we can implement SSR with React using the Next.
js framework.
 In Next.
js 15, we get SSR out of the box because unlike SSG, where we need to explicitly declare data caching, fetch requests are not cached by default.
 Thus, ensuring that SSR is the default behavior.
 You can implement SSR in several ways as you can see below: Since data caching is not the default option, you do not need to pass in any cache parameter options in your fetch request.
 By default, Next.
js will understand that subsequent requests to update data will need to be made.
 However, if you would like to explicitly declare this behaviour, the Fetch API comes with its own option for that and it is called no-store.
 You also have the option to set this behaviour by exporting a named constant, dynamic (it must be named this way) and setting it to a string value of force-dynamic.
 ISR — Incremental Static Generation If you want the best of both worlds, ISR is the way to go.
 If your pages are working with data and you also want the benefits of SSG, you can have the page rendered at build time and update data at specific intervals.
 This hybrid approach ensures that you can update your static pages after having built the entire site without having to update the entire site.
 You can see ISR in action below: Like we saw with SSG, we need to set the cache options parameter to a value of force-cache.
 This ensures that data fetched is cached and will be updated at a later time.
 For ISR, we need to pass in an additional parameter called next and set the revalidate property to a specific number (value in seconds).
 This will tell Next.
js to initiate another fetch request once that specific time has passed.
 You also have the option to set this behaviour by exporting a named constant, revalidate (it must be named this way) and setting it to a number which tells Next.
js how many seconds it has to wait before re-initiating another fetch request.
 As you can see, we get the benefits of both SSG and SSR and in many cases, this is probably the best way to design most of your web pages.
 Note also, how each of these pages are React server components which allows us to optimize these components using the different rendering methods we discussed.
 You do not get this benefit with client components because of the Hydration process we also discussed earlier.
 Alternative Solution for Client Components Client-side Components (CSR) have their place in Next.
js development.
 The key is optimizing their usage whenever you need them.
 For web applications, you will definitely need to work with React hooks, state, and so on.
 That is why there is a dedicated package for optimizing the data fetching process with client components known as SWR (Stale-While-Revalidate) .
 It is similar to TanStack Query in that you get data fetching, caching, revalidation out of the box, but it is optimized for Next.
js applications.
 The package comes with its own custom hook known as useSWR which means that it can only work with client components.
 You can see the SWR library in action in the Next.
js tutorial.
 Conclusion In all, we discussed in great detail, the different rendering strategies when working with Next.
js.
 We discussed SSG, SSR, ISR, and looked at an example of each rendering strategy.
 We covered the hydration process as it relates to client components and how we can optimize the usage of client components using the SWR library.
 Below, you will find links to the GitHub demo repository used in this article (Demo58_SSG_SSR_ISR_Frameworks), the SWR library, and the official Next.
js docs allowing you to read a bit more about each rendering strategy.
 GitHub Repository SWR Library Next.
js Official Docs I hope you found this article informative and look forward to more in the future.
 Thank you!
 Thank you for being a part of the community Before you go: Be sure to clap and follow the writer ️👏️️ Follow us: X | LinkedIn | YouTube | Newsletter | Podcast | Differ | Twitch Check out CoFeed, the smart way to stay up-to-date with the latest in tech 🧪 Start your own free AI-powered blog on Differ 🚀 Join our content creators community on Discord 🧑🏻‍💻 For more content, visit plainenglish.
io + stackademic.
com
